Okay, the tape is on.
Would you give us some biographical data on how you grew up and how you got interested
in writing science fiction?
Well, I grew up in Kansas.
Both of my parents teach, at least my mother used to, and then she became a newspaper woman.
So I grew up with words around the house a lot.
And while I was making up stories, I guess I was four or five, kind of thing where my
mother'd read you the bedtime story and put you to bed and nobody feels like going to
sleep yet.
So since I was too young to read, I hadn't discovered reading out the covers with flashlights
yet.
I made up stories until I was ready to go to sleep.
And then I started writing them down when I learned to write.
And about junior high school, I discovered science fiction.
Up to then it was cowboys and horses, like a lot with a lot of girls, I think.
But I discovered science fiction junior high, and I don't know why it caught me the way
it did.
I kind of got away from it later and got strictly into mystery.
And then came back to science fiction when I was in college.
And I've been hooked on science fiction mysteries ever since.
You probably noticed that a lot of the combination of the two in my work.
Being a little Kansas girl, did you ever read the Oz books?
No, as a matter of fact, I think, aside from The Wizard of Oz, I think I'd only seen, I
had some friends that had others.
But I'd never read them.
And I still haven't read them.
The dedications to all five of the books that you have in print now are all to Pat.
He must have influenced you a great deal.
Could you give some background into that influence and how he helped you get where you are?
Well, when we got married, I was writing.
We got married back in 1966.
And I think that Star Trek was either on the air, I think it was on the air at the time.
And like a lot of people, I got really hooked on Star Trek and was writing episodes for it.
And I guess at that time we were just going together.
And anyway, when we got married, I had stopped writing Star Trek and writing some stuff of my own.
And he got ignored somewhat because I was busy writing.
And he said, well, as long as you're going to be doing that, why don't you try sending it out?
And he bugged me and bugged me until I finally started sending things out.
And once I got sending stuff out, of course, I had lots of rejections.
He was very good about letting me crown his shoulder and also very candid about his opinion on the various stories,
some which led to grand battles, but he usually turned out to be right.
So he was very influential in getting me writing and in getting me sending out, keeping me sending out.
And then once the story started selling and once I turned to novels, he was my critic and chief cheerleader.
I understand there are a lot of spouses that the writers don't like to consult with their spouses very much
because they're too critical or they're not critical enough.
But Pat is very objective and he's an excellent critic and he knows, he has a good feel for what's right and what's wrong with the story.
And he has to hear everything I read, chapter by chapter, all the revisions.
So he's very patient and long suffering and he puts up with me.
Ignored evening after evening so that I can write because I've got deadlines I have to meet.
He understands that.
He makes sure I don't kill myself.
He comes in and pulls the plug on the typewriter at two or three in the morning if I'm starting to pull in all nighters
to make sure I get to sleep because I do have a job to get to the next morning.
So he's very important.
He's a critic and cheerleader.
He's now also my business manager.
He handles the publicity.
He talks to the TV stations to get me interviews on TV to get autograph sessions set up.
He handles plane tickets and hotel reservations and all the business ends.
He's an attorney so he's an expert on copyright.
He's starting to get seminars on copyright.
And he handles all the taxes and all the business work.
So it's kind of a partnership.
I do the writing and get the publishing done and he does all the work that keeps it going.
According to the bios in the backs of some of the books, it also says that Pat introduced you to science fiction fandom
and to science fiction conventions.
Do you find these a great help to your writing?
I've met a lot of writers at the science fiction conventions.
I've just been doing short stories.
I've been meeting the writers that got me started writing the novels
because they were the ones who were saying,
that's the only place you're going to make any money or make any kind of name for yourself.
But short stories, you can't make any money in short stories.
And of course some of the writers have become some of my dearest friends now.
I really like talking about writing.
So I love meeting fans who want to do nothing more than sit up all night and talk about science fiction and writing.
And I really think that it helps because you meet people and then you're a face to them, not just a name.
And they'll read something that is written by someone they know and then they can recommend it to friends.
And I realize that only a very small percentage of the population is in fandom and attends a convention.
If all the fans in the United States bought a book it would be a failure.
You have to have a lot more than that.
But still I think it helps.
And you get used to talking to people and getting used to going on TV shows.
And pretty soon I'm going to make some trips to the East Coast this year.
And I hope soon to make trips to the West Coast.
Which means I'll get autograph sessions at bookstores out there which will get my name spread a little wider.
So aside from being a lot of fun I think that as far as writing career goes that going to the convention is very, it pays.
You also work full time as I understand it.
Would you describe what your real world job is and also how you schedule your writing and your job so you can get both done?
Well the job is a regular 9 to 5 job.
As it happens I'm a chief technologist in the department of radiology in the College of Veterinary Medicine.
I'm an x-ray technician for animals and what an amount it is.
I'm in charge of educating the vet students.
That is I'm in charge of them when they're in the department itself which is sort of a laboratory situation for them.
And I say it's a 9 to 5 job and then I come home and write in the evenings.
I usually end up taking a notebook with a note from whatever the current work is to work with me.
And there are, there's a hiatus now and then.
And when that happens I can sit down and job notes I can't actually get any writing done.
I've got too much to do and there isn't enough, a long span of no work to get anything done.
But a lot of times in the midst of purely physical activity or purely routine activity at work
something I've been having a problem with for instance or an idea for revision or an idea of something to do in the chapter ahead will come up.
And I can jot it down so that I can, I'm still working while I'm in the real world job
because my subconscious is still writing the way whatever the writing project is at home.
And then I come home and I write in the evening and I'll write, write through on weekends too.
How do your colleagues and students at work take to your writing?
What do they think about it?
They're very tickled about it. I didn't know how administration and some of the doctors, the clinicians would take to it
because science fiction is in many quarters thought of as a very low-brow kind of writing.
But I find that they're very pleased about it when the dean of the vet school brings people to our hospital on a tour.
You should make some mention of the fact that I'm a public science fiction writer.
And I've gotten a couple of Ataboy kind of letters from the president to the university.
And we have, of course, journalism students at the university.
I'm usually good for about one appearance in the paper per semester as one of the journalism students has to get his,
his, so many inches of copy in and almost always one of them will appear.
So I'm pretty well publicized around campus and I don't find that they're looking down on me because I'm being published in fiction and science fiction
instead of in scientific journals like most of them get published.
So they take it very well and my boss is a real king.
I usually turn in my conventions schedule, let him at the beginning of the summer,
he fits his vacations in between my conventions schedule and he lets me off almost any weekend I want during the year to go to conventions too.
Our first exposure to you as a novelist was A Voice Out of Rama.
And that book seemed to set the tone for some of your subsequent works with the various elements in it.
As you mentioned previously, it's got a bit of a mystery although not quite as much as some of the other novels.
How did you come to write this book? How long did the ideas sit there percolating before it came out?
I don't really know. I try to keep track of the process of creativity because it fascinates me also because yet as a writer I'm asked so many questions about where ideas come from
and how they develop that I keep trying to find out.
I had a couple of writers who ganged up on me at some conventions and was convincing me that I really needed to write a novel.
And I don't know, these little bits and pieces all came together.
I keep telling people that creativity is a little bit like recombinant DNA.
Everything you read and see in here breaks up into component parts and bruises around your subconscious until it reaches a critical mass that is also viable.
And then it rises to the surface and you start putting ideas around it because the idea that comes up is just the grain in the middle.
You have to add all the rest of it around.
I had tried to do some Sherlock Holmes past teachings and one of them was a reverse where all the characters of the Holmes Watson characters were females.
And I had half invented a planet that had a matriarchy.
So that got me started thinking about how a matriarchy would work and why it would develop.
So I found myself working back for causes like that and all of a sudden I had this society that I used in Voice Out of Rama.
And once I had this society I just kind of sat down and thought, well, what kind of plot elements, what kind of conflicts can arise out of this society that would probably not arise out of any other.
And who is the one that's going to be most affected by these?
And so I came up with the plot that way and I came up with my major character that way.
And after that it was fun just building the planet and trying to make it as realistic and as logical as I could.
Then the doppelganger gamut came along and it seemed to be quite a change of pace since it was basically a police procedure science fiction novel.
You seem to be very familiar with police procedure, with how partners, how the interaction, that sort of thing.
Is this something from your background or did you have to research this?
I haven't had any practical experience in it.
I did have a police officer come up to me at the Science Fiction Convention once when I've been reading a chapter of doppelgangers and he asked me when I worked in law enforcement.
But I've been interested in law enforcement for a long time.
I noticed that the mysteries I always liked to read were the ones in which the police were the good guys.
I was never particularly interested in the lone wolf private eye.
I got listened to Dragonant on the radio and saw it on TV when I was pretty small.
I think maybe that was my first brush with police work.
I was just very interested in it. Joseph Wombow is one of my favorite authors.
I happened to know somebody by the way who gave him a copy of doppelganger gamut.
He told his friend that he really liked it a lot which tickled me.
Once I decided I wanted to write a mystery science fiction, I went ahead and did more research.
I've kept into it and of course that book itself and others have brought me into contact with more police officers.
They've passed on a lot of material to me.
I'm sort of actually working in it myself. I have gotten very familiar with it.
I suppose I keep reading about it and writing about it because it was interesting.
I've done so much research on it that it's a shame not to use the material.
The key to that book for me was the characters, Janet Brill and Mama Maxwell.
Were they based on people you'd known before or what?
No. They're based on nobody I know except that I always pictured Mama Maxwell as looking like Luke Offet Jr.
I was very surprised then to get the cover proof and find that the cover artist Michael Herring had also pictured in the same way
and found a model that looked so much like the characters that I'd pictured. It was wonderful.
Somewhere in the beginning when I was putting the book together, which had started as a novelette
and I knew it couldn't be a novelette because here I was 15 pages into something and just barely starting it.
I decided I wanted to use a Lady Cop so for contrast I gave her a male partner
and I can't remember why I decided to make him black.
One of these things that just kind of happened, somebody later pointed out that I had my female character
was the one that was working by the book and procedure and my male character was the one who was working on intuition
which is an interesting reverse on the way people generally think of males and females.
That just sort of happened. The characters sort of balanced one another
but a lot of the balance was unconscious on my part.
They were fun characters and I intend to work with them again.
So we will see them again.
Oh yes, as soon as I can think of something more for them to get into.
One of the other things that I really noticed in the book that made it that much more realistic was the slang.
I'm particularly curious where the term Leo's came from, a reference to the police officers.
I think I was seeing something about law enforcement officers one time and I noticed that it made Leo.
I thought that's great because it gave rise in my mind to all kinds of connotations
and I could see police officers enjoying being called Leo's because of the lion, the fierce kind of association you get with it
and therefore calling police stations lion then and someone who's likely to be picked up by the police is lion meat.
I had a pejorative. I had the street people calling them pussies when they weren't happy with them
but my editor wouldn't let me keep the word in the book.
So I think it got changed to kitty a couple of times in the book and I eliminated it where possible
because I really didn't like watered down.
I really did want to use pussies because it seemed to me like it would be the normal way people would pick up and twist something
when they wanted to make a derogatory term out of it.
I enjoy the slang. I enjoy trying to figure out where slang comes from and where it's going to go
and you may have noticed in a number of the books that I've played on slang
there's quite a bit of it in Deadly Silence and I'm even having some aliens slang in the current work I'm doing.
Deadly Silence seemed to, I took to be in the same future history as the doppelganger gambit.
They all are as a matter of fact except monitor. That was in a different one.
And there you went a little bit into the etymology of the word cop.
I didn't realize that's where it came from until I read it in that book.
There are several possibilities.
They usually teach a little bit of that in police history when they're teaching in police academies.
One thought it meant constable on patrol and sometimes it said,
well it comes from the copper buttons that they used to wear and the exact origin of the word isn't known.
But it's interesting to me to stumble across the term conservator of peace way back in early England
and it seems to me that an alien who was reading Earth's history and having come across the word cop referring to police officers
and the earlier conservative of peace, conservator of peace, might connect the two.
I found it interesting that the duties of the cops, I get you did call them cops from then on from chapter two or whatever
for the rest of the book because of the connotations of Leo's.
I found it interesting that their first priority was to the victim and then low and behold later on they have to defend the perpetrator.
Where did you come up with these seemingly novel ideas?
They kind of grew out of the society of the Aragara because the primary objective of the police there was of course to restore peace, to be peace officers.
And of course when anything that happened that was distrustful to the Aragara, it was painful to everybody around them.
So the first duty then was to the victim to help them understand what had happened to them.
I suppose it reflects a little bit of a reaction to some of the things that I've seen in our own culture where the victim suffers a lot
because everybody's so interested in catching the guy who did it.
A lot of times they're not paying too much attention to the victim himself.
Things are changing a little bit now with victims suing perpetrators and in collecting.
And people who are convicted of crimes in some states have to make restitution to victims.
So I thought I would just kind of carry that into a society that was less interested in punishing than in simply stopping the problem, whatever it was.
And since their system had no regular system for defense attorneys, it seemed to me that it would naturally fall on the only people that were involved in the criminal legal system,
which would be the ones who are also working for the prosecutor.
Actually ideally even in our culture, in a sense the police should be working for the defendant because if they can remove any doubt that he's guilty,
then when they take the case to court, it'll be a much sounder case.
But it often happens that expedience gets in the way and you pick someone who's likely and find all the evidence against them instead of
sifting through all the evidence and then taking the only person who could possibly be guilty of parting.
Since you said that Domple Ganger and Rama and deadly silence are all in the same future history, can you give us an idea of the chronological order,
maybe the distance, the time difference between those three books?
And do you plan to write in this future history?
I know you mentioned that you have a sidebar to Domple Ganger Gambit.
Do you plan to do a lot more writing in this future history?
I think I will.
It offers a lot of opportunities.
There are any number of planets available to set stories on.
And it can cover a long span of time.
Domple Ganger is the earliest because it's set right in the next century.
And then it's possible that Voice Out of Rama could come about the same time as deadly silence, but probably not.
The ships that set out to take shuttle boxes to the various colonies and put them in contact with the rest of the universe again,
set out about the time the shuttle boxes developed and got perfected.
So they had ships out running around.
And by the time that particular one particular ship got to the planet, got tomorrow,
it may have been several hundred years even after deadly silence.
But deadly silence and Voice Out of Rama are very close to each other within a century or two of each other.
Deadly silence is five or six hundred years after a Voice Out of Rama.
And of course the one I'm writing at the moment is within a century, a Domple Ganger Gambit.
It's a little difficult figuring real time and the fact that they had time dilation going on the ship.
So they were actually ten years away from Earth about when everything takes half happened.
So in actual real time, probably the book I'm writing now in the Domple Ganger Gambit happened almost simultaneously.
Your fourth novel, The Monitor of the Miners in the Shree, is completely different.
And as you said, it's in a different future history.
Will you do any writing in that future history?
Or what was it? The Sodality? That was the governing organization.
That's a future history that I was working on as a teenager, which started out as very peaceful and wonderful
and tended to get much more complex and much more violent.
The older I got, the more I realized that people just didn't get along with each other all the time.
I had several short stories that are set in that particular universe.
And I'll probably come back to it again.
It's an interesting one because it has a lot of different groups, none of which are human,
and offers possibilities for societies and interplays.
And aliens, in the future history I have set up the one that most of the novels are in, has a minimal of aliens
before we actually have only run across one, which is spacing.
And then, of course, there's aliens on the planet on which the colonists who are in trouble on the Invictus land
of the book I'm working on, the one that has some aliens on it.
But there's a minimal of aliens, and if I want to deal with alien species, it's just really easy to go to that other future history
which has all kinds of aliens running around.
I like to think that it's just being on our same galaxy, it's just on the other side,
way out of contact with us, probably not where we're likely to run into it very soon.
I'd like to ask you a question here on your, not so much as a science fiction writer,
just from all your experience up to now.
What is your idea of aliens as far as real life is concerned?
We have the idea that there are a lot of them, other people have the idea that maybe life is abundant,
but intelligence is not. Do you have any feelings about that one where the other predictions now?
I just can't feel that we're the only intelligent species in the galaxy or in the universe.
With infinite possibilities and infinite worlds out there, possibly less of them are habitable by our standards.
Then we might like to think because you have to have them within a continual life zone
instead of these edges where they're keep slipping in and out of a life zone.
So maybe possibilities for really intelligent life are fewer, but I think they're out there somewhere.
I would really love to meet one.
This book strikes me as coming closest to a so-called hard science fiction book.
You evidently put in a lot of work on the biology and the evolutionary facts of the Shree.
Is this something you'd been thinking about since you were a teenager or how did that evolve?
I think it's kind of evolved.
Because of my husband's interest in psychology and law, I started out and my interest was mostly in really hard science fiction.
I was a die-hard analog reader.
The first story I ever sold was to analog, and it was an analog kind of story.
I haven't sold a story to analog since.
Almost everything I've written since has come out in...
The majority of it has come out in fantasy science fiction.
I've had one in Galileo and a couple in Ace Magazine before it folded.
But I got more and more interested in people and realizing that hardware wasn't the thing,
but it was people, and that people were interesting and what made them tick.
And so the more I started researching that, the more I got interested in what makes societies click.
And then when I started making up aliens and I started reading a lot of anthropology to figure out,
you know, really how societies go together, the more I read, the more I researched, the more fascinated I got.
I put together a background book before I ever start the novel itself.
It's an amount of work that I know some people find exhausting.
They couldn't do it and still have any energy left to write the book.
But I enjoy it. I'm very systematic.
I start out with a lot of visual images in my head.
And with vague visual images, you have to have them developed to a very clear image,
and you have to find the words for them and get them translated into actual words out of pictures before you can get them down on paper.
So I do a background book and I do maps of the planet and I do drawings of the flora and fauna and biographies of the people.
And the more I read and read on climatology and planetology, the more complex backgrounds get.
It takes me about the same amount of time to put a background together, but it gets much more complicated.
Now, the finished background is almost as thick as the final manuscript on the book.
I keep finding out how complex societies and ecologies are.
There's no way, of course, I can really create one in detail, but I keep working at making them as logical and as realistic as I can.
I keep discovering how much people are influenced by their cultures in very unconscious ways.
And I strive to make an alien that is genuinely alien, but of course not so much that the human won't be interested in reading about them.
But so that they will react in very alien ways, I work out the culture down to jokes they think are funny and what their musical instruments are and what toys their kids play with,
maybe even what their plumbing looks like.
The whole society created in such detail in my own mind that the characters' actions will be influenced by their environment.
And a lot of times I find conflicts in the story then growing out of that society, so they don't just sound like a plot that's been picked up and translated from mainstream Earth.
There are things that happen then that could only have happened on that particular planet because of their particular attitudes, because of their particular environment and culture.
The monitor of the miners in the Shrieb ends with a trial. I suppose this must be inevitable since you've been around a lawyer so long.
In fact, the lawyer half wrote that particular chapter. He was telling me, oh, this character ought to say that, and then you ought to bring up this point, and then you ought to counter with that legal point.
And the whole chapter definitely got submitted to him for scrutiny as to procedure and logical thinking. So he's happy at, he's happy, creator of that last chapter.
Your book of short stories, Aventine, just came out. Could you compare writing a novel with writing short stories beyond the obvious, just sheer amount of time it takes to put the words down?
Well, I think in a novel you have so much more time to create a society and a world and to dwell on character, characterization.
A short story tends to be one little piece, one particular scene, one particular incident, particularly with Aventine stories. It's a mood that's created and kind of a night gallery kind of mood, I think, probably, and a night gallery kind of visual image there.
And the short story, of course, is to be very concise. But I think dealing with a little punch, you know, boom, here's one idea. Look it over and here it is.
Whereas a novel, you deal with a lot of complex ideas and a long span of time and it isn't so much mood perhaps for a novel, it's definitely characterization, the creation of a whole lot of things around the characters.
Sometimes when I read science fiction books, I get the idea that the writer is a frustrated scientist who can't, so he or she writes. When I read Aventine, I couldn't help but notice the centering on the arts in all their various guises. Are you a frustrated artist?
Well, I don't think I'm frustrated. I am an artist. My artistry happens to be writing. I'm also a fair singer and I do a fair amount of drawing. Most of the drawing these days becomes drawings for the background books that I put together.
That whole group centering around the arts was kind of an accident. The first story of the group was The Siren Garden. And then I did a second one that had, it was, Tropic of Eden.
And when that came out in the magazine, the little blurb that went with it said something about the future of the arts. So every time I turned in a story to him after that, I just had simply written a story around one of the arts.
He sort of mentioned, he sort of set up a pattern with his little intro and I simply kept it up. I had no objections to it because I find dancing fascinating. And I've been involved in theater.
So I enjoy the arts very much and I'm very much a part of them. And I do consider myself an artist. Some writers aren't born, artists are. And some artists are dancers, some artists are painters, some of us are writers.
Did you have to work hard to come up with some of the futuristic art forms such as the moving sculptures and the infrared detected dance, that sort of thing?
Most of that, it's a little hard for me to remember how hard it was because once of course it's created, it seems like it was inevitable that it happened that way.
Most of those stories came out of images. There'd be like one single image. I liked the image of a pair of footprints scarlet in sand going away and the image just kept with me and kept with me until I found a story to go with it.
I can't remember if I had to work hard to get those futuristic art forms or not. I really can.
Albert, one of the stories, the Aventine stories in the collection are written from a first person male point of view. Why did you write them from a male point of view and is this kind of challenging since your background is the opposite sex?
I'm not sure why I started writing them out from a male point of view. I can't remember the genesis of the Siren Garden story. I can remember some of the elements that went into it.
I think possibly it was because one of my favorite short stories has been K. G. Belard's Vermillion Sands story. They're very much the same kind of a mood and the same kind of a decadent society.
Those were all written from a first person male view point. That may have influenced because I had this living gem idea that I tried in several forms and had always failed with.
Then I tried applying the kind of formula for the stories that were in the J. Belard series. It seemed to work. I just kept up with it.
I think if I were to write the whole thing over again I would try to experiment a little more as I did with Bette Noix which I turned things around then and had the woman telling it.
I like those particular stories from a first person point of view because you can understand that the storyteller is always victimized in some way in those particular stories.
You see inside of him and you don't see things outside. You just see things entirely from his point of view and why you may think he's dumb and getting trapped like that.
You can see why he ends up being victimized.
You mentioned a few minutes ago that you are intrigued by the creative process. When I read Shadow Dance I recall that Christopher Lloyd the protagonist.
We kind of see the creative process for his choreographing the dance. Is that pretty much how you came up with this idea? Did his line of reasoning follow your line of reasoning?
Good question.
In the sense that having been a dancer the bits and pieces of past dances he'd done came back to him and one of them fell into place for him to use then.
Someone who is a dancer might get a second level of pleasure out of that particular story because basically the plot line with the two women and then the men that they have destroyed and the man that is destroyed by them in the story
follows Jerome Robbins' ballet The Cage which is a very science fiction kind of ballet. If you ever have a chance to see it you ought to because it's really a very strange ballet.
I came across a scenario that explained that particular ballet and then I happened to see it performed and it seemed a great plot generally to put to use for a story.
I think his creative process kind of follows the way that a lot of creative process does. You have a lot of past experience and a lot of ideas floating around and then two good ones bump into each other and things click and then they start to add up.